# Introduction to Digital Design & Computer Architecture

## Abstraction

* As in most areas of computer science, the most important technique is *abstraction*.
    * Abstraction is the art of hiding implementation details when a higher-level view is sufficient.

* When it comes to computers, we have the following features in increasing levels of abstraction:
    * *Physics*: At the lowest level are the actual physical processes that come together to make computing possible, such as how electricity works.
    * *Devices*: The physical processes can be made to work in our favor by constructing electronic devices, such as transistors, which do the work of making the particular results we want happen.
        * Here, we've abstracted away the precise physical details into transistors which we can build things out of.
    * *Analog Circuits*: The transistors we make can be put together into analog circuits, which are sort-of obstacle courses that we run electricity through to make numbers do things.
        * Instead of worrying about how the transistors go together, we leave those details to the people who build the analog circuits, and we use these analog circuits to build systems.
    * *Digital Circuits*: The analog circuits are a physical object which can be modeled in a more ideal, mathematical setting by digital circuits.
        * Instead of worrying about precisely how voltages work, we can just say that we have voltage levels `0` and `1` which can be manipulated with logic gates.
    * *Logic*: Digital circuits can be modeled even more mathematically through logic, and we can use logical rules to construct complex systems out of the mathematical models for our digital circuits.
        * For example, we can ignore how digital circuits deal with voltages and just assign truth values to statements and use those statements to model specific behaviors, such as adders which use logic gates to transform two sequences of bits into a sequence representing their sum.
    * *Microarchitecture*: This level is sort-of awkward, because the best description I can think of is to call it the more concrete form of the next level of abstraction.
        * In other words, a microarchitecture is just a particular implementation of a CPU's architecture.
    * *Architecture*: The architecture of a computer is the instruction set together with registers of a computer's CPU.
        * Instead of having to understand *how* things are implemented, we use the instructions as black box APIs to access the results of those implementations.
    * *Operating System*: An operation system provides access to an architecture through higher-level constructs, such as more APIs, which have specific uses that then call the specific instructions of the underlying architecture.
        * This is how, for example, C code written for Linux can work between x86 and ARM versions, as the Linux kernel, itself, provides APIs which have different implementations, but the same results, between x86 and ARM.
    * *Software*: Finally, instead of having to tell an operating system how one wants things done, as a user, one needs only to run a program that someone else has made that will automatically tell the operating system what you want it to do.

* This course deals with the levels of abstraction from digital circuits through architecture.
    * See [my other set of notes](https://www.github.com/MathNerdGamer/OSTEP) for operating systems, which I am working on concurrently with this.

* When working with computer systems, understanding the level of abstraction necessary to both maintain a good level of performance as well as make actual progress towards a complete system, such as a piece of software, is important.
    * As such, it's important to make sure to understand how much complexity is necessary without going overboard.

* In order to manage complexity, we have the following constructs:
    * *Hierarchy*: We divide a system into modules, which then get further subdivided into submodules, and so on.
        * Think of a computer program having multiple source files, which each have multiple functions, and so on.
    * *Modularity*: We maintain a coherent design for our functions and interfaces so that we can put them together without any surprises.
        * A programmer's worst nightmare is finding surprises in the code that they write.
    * *Regularity*: We specify our modules in such a way that they can be interchanged as needed.
        * For example, we may wish to write a function that can sort objects of any sortable type -- in this case, we write a specification that is general enough to handle any sortable type.

## Digital Abstraction

* 