# Number Systems

## Decimal

* The number system typically used by humans is the *decimal* system.

* The digits in this *base-10* system are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.

* We form larger numbers by combining multiple digits: 10 is the number after 9, and 100 is the number after 99.

* An $N\rm{-digit}$ decimal number has $10^{N}$ possible values, if we include leading 0s.

* A number in decimal is a sum of its digits when multiplied by their corresponding *place values*.
    * The number $1234$ is $1234 = 1\cdot 10^{3} + 2 \cdot 10^{2} + 3\cdot 10^{1} + 4\cdot 10^{0}$.
    * We will see this same pattern arise in other number systems.

* When talking about decimal numbers, you might see a subscript $10$, such as $1234_{10}$, to indicate that it's a number in base-10.
    * In these notes, if the context doesn't specify a number system, then assume no subscript means base-10.

## Binary

* The *binary* number system is *base-2*, and the symbols used as called *bits*.
    * In these notes, unless the context makes it obvious what number system we're using, we'll specify binary numbers with a prefix $\mathrm{0b}$.
    * The source textbook for these notes uses a subscript 2 instead.
    * So, the following are all binary numbers: $\mathrm{0b}10101001$, $10101001_{2}$, and $10101001$, where the last one has no explicit indicator because we've specified that we're working with binary numbers in this context.

* As with decimal, a binary number is the sum of its bits when multiplied by their corresponding place values.
    * $\mathrm{0b}10101001 = 1\cdot 2^{7} + 0\cdot 2^{6} + 1\cdot 2^{5} + 0\cdot 2^{4} + 1\cdot 2^{3} + 0\cdot 2^{2} + 0\cdot 2^{1} + 1\cdot 2^{0}$.

* Binary is a natural number system for computing, because we can model bits as high or low voltages in the physical implementation of computing systems.

### Conversion Between Binary and Decimal

* Converting from binary to decimal is quite easy.
    * For example, $\mathrm{0b}10101001 = 1\cdot 2^{7} + 0\cdot 2^{6} + 1\cdot 2^{5} + 0\cdot 2^{4} + 1\cdot 2^{3} + 0\cdot 2^{2} + 0\cdot 2^{1} + 1\cdot 2^{0} = 128 + 0 + 32 + 0 + 8 + 0 + 0 + 1 = 161$.

* Converting from decimal to binary takes just a little more work.
    * We employ a greedy algorithm.

* **Algorithm.** [Decimal-to-Binary] Given a number $x$ in decimal:
    * Find the largest power of 2 less than or equal to $x$.
        * The power of this largest power of 2 is the column that gets a 1 (here, we count columns from 0 starting from the right).
        * Any columns between this 1 and the previous 1 gets a 0.
    * Subtract this power of 2 from $x$.
        * If $x$ is 0, fill any remaining columns with 0 and finish.
        * Otherwise, start over with this new value of $x$.

* For an example, we will convert 84 from decimal to binary:
    * The largest power of 2 that fits in 84 is 64.
        * Hence, we have a 1 in column 6: $\mathrm{0b}1\cdot \cdot \cdot \cdot \cdot \cdot$
    * After subtracting, we have 20, which means the next largest power of 2 is 16.
        * Hence, we have a 1 in column 4, and 0s between the two 1s: $\mathrm{0b}101 \cdot \cdot \cdot \cdot$
    * Now we have 4, which is already a power of 2.
        * Hence, we have a 1 in column 2, and 0 everywhere else: $\mathrm{0b}1010100$.

## Hexadecimal

* While binary is a natural system for computing, the numbers get very long very quickly.

* To combat this, we can "compress" our numbers into a *base-16* system, the *hexadecimal* system.
    * The symbols used in hexadecimal are: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F.
    * In these notes, unless the context makes it obvious what number system we're using, we'll specify hexadecimal numbers with a prefix $\mathrm{0x}$.
    * The source textbook for these notes uses a subscript 16 instead.
    * So, the following are all binary numbers: $\mathrm{0x2ED}$, $\mathrm{2ED}_{16}$, and $\mathrm{2ED}$, where the last one has no explicit indicator because we've specified that we're working with hexadecimal numbers in this context.

* And, as with other number systems, we can put multiple symbols together to form larger numbers, where a number is the sum of its symbols when multiplied by their corresponding place values.
    * $\mathrm{0x2ED} = 2\cdot 16^{2} + \mathrm{E}\cdot 16^{1} + \mathrm{D}\cdot 16^{0}$.
    * Here, $\mathrm{0xA} = 10_{10}$, $\mathrm{0xB} = 11_{10}$, $\mathrm{0xC} = 12_{10}$, $\mathrm{0xD} = 13_{10}$, $\mathrm{0xE} = 14_{10}$, and $\mathrm{0xF} = 15_{10}$.

### Conversion of Hexadecimal Numbers

* Converting a number from hexadecimal to decimal is easy.
    * For example, $\mathrm{0x2ED} = 2\cdot 16^{2} + \mathrm{E}\cdot 16^{1} + \mathrm{D}\cdot 16^{0} = 2\cdot 256 + 14\cdot 16 + 13 = 749$.

* Converting from hexademical to binary is also easy, but in a slight different way.
    * Each symbol in a hexadecimal number corresponds to exactly 4 bits.
    * To get the full binary number, just put the bits together in the order they came from the hexadecimal symbols.
    * For example, $\mathrm{0x2ED}$: $\mathrm{0x2} = \mathrm{0b}0010$, $\mathrm{0xE} = \mathrm{0b}1110$, and $\mathrm{0xD} = \mathrm{0b}1101$, so the binary representation is $\mathrm{0b}001011101101$.

* Converting binary to hexadecimal is pretty much the same.
    * For example, we can convert $\mathrm{0b}10101001$ to hexadecimal.
    * The first four bits are $\mathrm{0b}1010 = \mathrm{0xA}$, and the second four bits are $\mathrm{0b}1001 = \mathrm{0x9}$, and so $\mathrm{0b}10101001 = \mathrm{0xA9}$.

* For a second example, consider $\mathrm{0b}101101$.
    * There are 6 symbols, so we can't break this into exact groups of 4 as-is.
    * We start by padding with 0s on the left, so $\mathrm{0b}101101 = \mathrm{0b}00101101$.
    * Now, $\mathrm{0b}0010 = \mathrm{0x2}$, and $\mathrm{0b}1101 = \mathrm{0xD}$, and so $\mathrm{0b}101101 = \mathrm{0x2D}$.

* Finally, converting from decimal to hexadecimal uses another greedy approach, and can be seen as a slightly modified form of the decimal-to-binary algorithm.

* **Algorithm** [Decimal-to-Hexadecimal] Given a number $x$ in decimal:
    * Find the largest power of 16 less than or equal to $x$.
        * Now, we're not quite done this time: Now, we find the largest number from 1 to 15 that we can multiply that power of 16 by to still be less than or equal to $x$.
        * Convert that multiple to its corresponding hexadecimal symbol, and that symbol goes in the column corresponding to the power of 16 we found.
        * Any columns between this symbol and the previous symbol gets a 0.
    * Subtract this multiple of the power of 16 from $x$.
        * If $x$ is now 0, fill any remaining columns with 0 and finish.
        * Otherwise, start over with this value of $x$.

* So, for an example, let's convert $333_{10}$ to hexadecimal.
    * The largest power of 16 that fits within our number is $256 = 16^{2}$.
    * No larger multiples work, so we put a 1 in column 2, giving $\mathrm{0x1\cdot \cdot}$, and subtract.
    * $333 - 256 = 77$.
    * The largest power fitting within 77 of 16 is 1, and can be multiplied by at most 4 to get $64$.
    * Hence, we put a 4 in column 1, giving $\mathrm{0x14 \cdot}$, and subtract.
    * Finally, since $77 - 64 = 13$, we put a D at the end, giving $\mathrm{0x14D}$.

## Bytes and Words

* A group of 8 bits is called a *byte*.
    * A byte is typically the smallest unit of size in a computer.

* Microprocessors work with data in chunks of bytes called *words*.
    * The size of a word depends on the architecture.
    * A common word size in the past was 16 bits, but this turned to 32 bits and, eventually as it is today, 64 bits.
    * Very old code might make reference to *double words* or *quad words*, though these terms are not all that common nowadays.
        * These units were used when 16-bit words were not large enough for the sorts of computations being done.

* The bit in the 1's place is called the *least-significant bit* (*lsb*), and the bit on the other end is the *most-significant bit* (*msb*).

* Within words, there are also the *least-significant byte* (*LSB*) and *most-significant byte* (*MSB*), though the position of these when reading a number depends on the architecture or context you're working in.
    * A reference to Jonathan Swift's *Gulliver's Travels*, the position of the least- and most-significant bytes is called the [*endianness*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endianness).
    * Some systems are big-endian, meaning that the largest bytes show first when reading left-to-right, while others are little-endian, where it's the reverse.
    * The currently most-popular Desktop architecture, x86-64 is little-endian, while (historically) architectures like MIPS and SPARK were big-endian.
    * The architecture that will be studied in these notes, RISC-V, is little-endian.
    * A lot of networking protocols have also, historically, been big-endian (See: [RFC 1700](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1700)).
        * As a result, there are functions `htons() / htonl()` and `ntohs() / htonl()` for converting between host and network byte order in C.

* For large groupings of bytes, we have (mis)used certain prefixes.
    * For powers of 10, we call $10^{3} = 1000$ bytes a *kilobyte*, $10^{6}$ bytes a *megabyte*, and so on.
    * Historically, we used to use the same prefixes for powers of 2, so $2^{10} = 1024$ bytes was called a kilobyte, $2^{20}\approx 1\text{ million}$ bytes was called a megabyte, and so on, respectively.
    * However, we now have prefixes for powers of 2, a *kibibyte*, a *mibibyte*, and so on, respectively.
    * Because of this historic blunder, there are many mismatched names for things, where, for example, RAM is measured using powers of 2 while persistent storage, such as hard drives, are measured in powers of 10, but both use the same prefixes.

## Binary Arithmetic

### Binary Addition

* When adding decimal numbers, we use a *carry* when adding digit-by-digit to deal with results which require more than 1 symbol to represent.
    * For example:
    ```
         11
        4277
    +   5499
    --------
        9776
    ```
    * In this example, $7 + 9 = 16$, so we write a 6 and carry a 1 to the next column and continue.

* Addition of binary numbers is pretty much the same as with decimal numbers.
    * For example:
    ```
         11
        1011
    +   0011
    ---------
        1110
    ```
    * In this example, two 1's added together results in a 0 with a carry of 1.

* We call the bit being carried the *carry bit*.

* Digital systems work on fixed-length numbers, so we may enter cases where an addition goes beyond what can be represented.
    * In the case when the carry bit is set after adding the most-significant bits, we call this an *overflow*.
    * For example, if we're working with 4-bit numbers:
    ```
        1
        1100
    +   0110
    --------
        0010
    ```
    * In this example, we're adding 12 with 6, which *should* result in 18, but since we're limited to 4 bits, we only get 2.

### Signed Binary Numbers

* So far, we've been considering *unsigned* binary numbers.

* Mathematically, subtraction is just addition with negative numbers, so we should look into how to represent negative numbers in binary.
    * In other words, we want to represent *signed* binary numbers.

#### Sign/Magnitude Representation

* Probably the most obvious idea is to use the most-significant bit position as an indicator of the sign.
    * We use `0` at the front to denote positive numbers, and `1` at the front for negative.

* This is known as *sign/magnitude* representation.

* However, there are a couple of issues:
    * There are two representations for 0.
        * For example, with 4 bits, 0000 and 1000.
    * Adding a negative and positive number *doesn't* always result in 0.
        ```
            1 1
            0101
        +   1101
        --------
            0010
        ```
        * The result of adding 5 and -5 using sign/magnitude is 2.
        * Even if we allowed the number of bits to increase, we would have 10010, which would be either -2 in 5-bit sign/magnitude, or 18 when interpreted as an unsigned 5-bit number.

#### Two's Complement

* *Two's complement* numbers are binary numbers where the most-significant bit position accounts adds a value of $-2^{N-1}$ to the total value of the number.
    * In other words, two binary numbers whose bits differ only in the most-significant bit are different by $-2^{N-1}$ in the direction of the one with a 1 in that position.

* In this system, we have only one representation of 0, the all-0's string.
    * The other representation we saw in sign/magnitude is now $-2^{N-1}$.

* There are two ways to *reverse the sign* of a binary number:
    * First method: Invert all the bits, then add 1.
    * Second method: Copy all 0s starting from the least-significant bit until we hit a 1, which we copy down, and then invert all remaining bits to the right.
    * These are equivalent: When we invert the bits and add 1, any 0's from the least-significant bit turn to 1's and then back to 0's, and the first 1 turns into 0 from inversion and back to 1 from the carry bit, while all the bits to the left of that first 1 remain inverted.
    * Examples:
        * From 2 to -2 (4-bit): 0010 -> 1110
        * From -7 to 7 (8-bit): 00000111 -> 11111001

* The most negative $N\rm{-bit}$ number $-2^{N-1}$, which is 1 followed by $N-1$ 0's, is called a *weird number*.
    * If we try reversing the sign, we end up with $-2^{N-1}$ all over again.
    * Note that the *largest* that a two's complement $N\rm{-bit}$ number can be is $2^{N-1} - 1$, and so we can't represent $2^{N-1}$ with $N$ bits in two's complement.

### Binary Subtraction

* Now that we have a representation of negative numbers in binary using two's complement, let's see if it works for subtraction (using 4-bit examples).
    * Example 1: 1 - 2
        * First, note that $1 - 2 = 1 + \left(-2\right)$, so we convert the binary 2 (0010) to -2 (1110).
        ```
            1110
        +   0001
        --------
            1111 (= -1 in base 10)
        ```
    * Example 2: 7 - 7
        * 7 is 0111, so -7 is 1001
        ```
            111
            0111
        +   1001
        --------
            0000
        ```

* We don't consider the carry bit being set in the second example to be an overflow, as we expect there to eventually be a discarded bit.

* However, overflow can still occur when adding/subtracting two's complement numbers.
    * Example (4-bit): 4 + 5
    ```
        1
        0100
    +   0101
    --------
        1001
    ```
    * This is -7 represented using a two's complement binary number, which is absurd.
    * Therefore, we call this an *overflow*.

* When we need to extend a two's complement number to more bits, we just prepend whatever the most-significant bit is.
    * If we need to extend the 4-bit representation of 6, $\mathrm{0b}0110$, to 8 bits, we get $\mathrm{0b}00000110$.
    * To extend the 4-bit representation of -7 to 8 bits, we go from $\mathrm{0b}1001$ to $\mathrm{0b}11111001$.

* Now that we've looked at binary numbers and basic arithmetic, we're ready to move on to the topic of the next note where we look at digital systems which operate on them.

**Next: Logic Gates (Coming Soon)**