# Analog Logic

* Like any interface, digital logic gates must be implemented before they can really be used.

* This means that we need to somehow map the continuous variables in analog circuits to the discrete variables of digital logic.

* And, because the real world is very noisy, we have to handle *noise* in our inputs/outputs.

* So, how do we deal with it?

## Supply Voltage & Logic Levels

* Suppose the lowest level of our system of 0 V, aka *ground* or *GND*.

* The highest voltage level is $V_{DD}$, which was usually 5 V in the earlier days of computing in the 70s and 80s.
    * Nowadays, lower values like 3.3 V, 2.5 V, and even lower are becoming more common.

* We map the continuous voltage values to a discrete binary variable by defining *logic levels* as intervals of values.

* We use two gates, called the *driver* and the *receiver*, where the output of the driver is connected to the input of the receiver.
    * The driver's output produces a *LOW* (0) in the range of $0$ to $V_{OL}$ and *HIGH* (1) in the range $V_{OH}$ to $V_{DD}$, where OL and OH stand for *output low* and *output high*, respectively.
    * The receiver produces a LOW (0) value in the range $0$ to $V_{IL}$ and HIGH (1) in the range $V_{IH}$ to $V_{DD}$, where IL and IH mean *input low* and *input high*, respectively.

* The voltage levels satisfy the following inequality: $0 \leq V_{OL} < V_{IL} < V_{IH} < V_{OH} \leq V_{DD}$.
    * We call the range of values from $V_{IL}$ to $V_{IH}$ the *forbidden zone*, because there's no coherent value we could assign to the final output.

* Because of the gap between the input and output levels, we can handle some noise in our voltages in the worst-case outputs and still interpret the input correctly.
    * We call this gap the *noise margin*.
    * We split this between low and high noise margins.
        * $NM_{L} = V_{IL} - V_{OL}$ and $NM_{H} = V_{OH} - V_{IH}$.

* The noise margin gives us an amount of noise that can be tolerated without altering the interpretation of a voltage.

## DC Transfer Characteristics

* The *DC Transfer Characteristics* of a gate describe the output voltage as a function of the input voltage when the voltage is changed slowly enough for the system to to keep up.
    * An idealized inverter would switch between HIGH and LOW on either side of exactly $V_{DD} / 2$.
        * Calling the input $A$ and output $Y$: If $V\left(A\right) < V_{DD} / 2$, then $V\left(Y\right) = V_{DD}$ and if $V\left(A\right) > V_{DD} / 2$, then $V\left(Y\right) = 0$.
    * In reality, however, inverters change more gradually.
        * If $V\left(A\right) = 0$, then $V\left(Y\right) = V_{DD}$ and if $V\left(A\right) = V_{DD}$, then $V\left(Y\right) = 0$.
        * However, voltages change gradually between these values, and the center of this transition may not be at exactly $V_{DD} / 2$.

* In order to define logic levels, we can try where $\frac{dV\left(Y\right)}{dV\left(A\right)} = -1$.
    * These are called the *unity gain points*.
    * Choosing logic levels at unit gain points usually maximizes noise margins.


## The Static Discipline

* The *static discipline* requires that logically valid inputs lead to logically valid outputs.
    * This allows gates to avoid entering the forbidden zone.

* Conforming to this means some flexibility in analog circuitry is sacrificed for simple and robust digital circuits.

* In order for gates to communicate, they must have compatible logic levels.
    * We group gates into *logic families* so that all gates in a particular family obey the static principle between each other.
    * Because of this compatibility, logic circuits can be built rather conveniently.

* For example, we have the following four major logic families from the 70's to 90's:
    * Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL)
    * Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS)
    * Low-Voltage TTL (LVTTL)
    * Low-Voltage CMOS (LVCMOS)

* There are varying levels of intercompatibility between these families.